Data Cleaning & Preparation
📌 Project Overview
This project is part of the Decode Labs Data Analytics Internship Program. The objective of this project is to clean and prepare raw data for analysis using Python and Pandas. Data cleaning is an essential step in the data analytics process because raw datasets often contain missing values, duplicate records, inconsistent formatting, and other quality issues.
The project demonstrates how to transform raw data into a clean, reliable, and analysis-ready dataset.
🎯 Objective
The primary objectives of this project are:
Handle missing values in the dataset
Remove duplicate records
Standardize date formats
Clean and format text data
Improve overall data quality and consistency
Prepare the dataset for further analysis
🛠 Technologies Used
The following technologies and libraries were used:
Python
Pandas
OpenPyXL
Visual Studio Code (VS Code)

Files Description
Decode_labs_dataset.xlsx
Contains the original raw dataset with missing values, duplicates, and inconsistent formatting.
clean_data.py
Python script used to perform all data cleaning operations.
cleaned_dataset.xlsx
Final cleaned dataset generated after preprocessing.
requirements.txt
Contains required Python libraries.
🔄 Data Cleaning Process
The following preprocessing steps were performed:
1. Load Dataset
The Excel dataset was loaded into a Pandas DataFrame.
import pandas as pd

df = pd.read_excel("Decode_labs_dataset.xlsx")
2. Identify Missing Values
The dataset was checked for null or missing values.
df.isnull().sum()
3. Handle Missing Values
Missing values in important columns were filled using appropriate methods.
df["CouponCode"] = df["CouponCode"].fillna("No Coupon")
4. Remove Duplicate Records
Duplicate entries were identified and removed.
df = df.drop_duplicates()
5. Standardize Date Formats
Date columns were converted into a consistent format.
df["Date"] = pd.to_datetime(df["Date"])
6. Clean Text Columns
Text fields were standardized by removing extra spaces and converting values into title case.
df["Product"] = df["Product"].str.strip().str.title()
7. Save Cleaned Dataset
The cleaned dataset was exported to a new Excel file.
df.to_excel("cleaned_dataset.xlsx", index=False)
📊 Results
After cleaning, the dataset became:
More consistent
Free from duplicate records
Easier to analyze
Improved in accuracy and reliability
Ready for data analytics tasks
📈 Output
The project successfully generated:
cleaned_dataset.xlsx
which contains the final cleaned and processed data.
🎓 Learning Outcomes
Through this project, the following concepts were learned:
Data Cleaning Techniques
Data Preprocessing
Handling Missing Values
Removing Duplicate Records
Working with Excel Files using Pandas
Data Quality Improvement
Data Preparation Workflow
🚀 How to Run the Project
Step 1: Install Dependencies
pip install pandas openpyxl
Step 2: Run the Python Script
python clean_data.py
Step 3: Check Output
After successful execution, the cleaned dataset will be generated as:
cleaned_dataset.xlsx

This project demonstrates the importance of data cleaning in real-world analytics workflows. By handling missing values, removing duplicates, standardizing formats, and improving data quality, the dataset was successfully transformed into a clean and reliable source for future analysis.